2_etl_specifications/documentation/home.md, before:

---
title: Home
layout: default
nav_order: 1
permalink: /
---

# FinnGen to OMOP CDM v5.4

In addition to genotype data, FinnGen includes the phenotype data from several national registers. 
This site details how the most relevant registers have been converted to the OMOP CDM v5.4. 

In addition to the international vocabularies provided by OMOP, we use national vocabularies build by the FinOMOP group, and few custom vocabularies build by FinnGen [[Appendix:Vocabularies]()]. As a result, most of the events in the clinical data tables have a `source_concept_id` that link to the source non-standard code. This makes the local codes searchable in Atlas and usable in local analysis [^fn1].    

Provided register data has been collected and preprocessed by the Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare (THL). Some of the original columns have been split and some have been merged together. To ease the code mapping, rather than reshape the large provided tables we use a mapping table `fg_codes_info`  [Appendix:Vocabularies]()]. 

Moreover, an intermediate `stem` table is used to collects all the medical events. Events are then placed in the different OMOP domain tables based on the domain of the medical code.   


```mermaid
%%{init: {'theme': 'base' } }%%
flowchart LR
    subgraph FinnGen Registers
        finngenid_info[<a href='finngenid_info.html'>finngenid_info</a>]
        purch[<a href='purch.html'>purch</a>]
        hilmo[<a href='hilmo.html'>hilmo</a>]
        prim_out[<a href='prim_out.html'>prim_out</a>]
        reimb[<a href='reimb.html'>reimb</a>]
        canc[<a href='canc.html'>canc</a>]
        death_register[<a href='death_register.html'>death_register</a>]
        birth_mother[<a href='birth_mother.html'>birth_mother</a>]
    end

    stem[<a href='stem.html'>stem</a>]

    subgraph CDM OMOP v5.4
        person
        observation_period
        visit_occurrence
        drug_exposure
        measurement
        observation
        conndition_occurrence
        procedure_occurrence
        device_exposure
        death
        provider
    end


    finngenid_info-->person
    finngenid_info-->observation_period
    finngenid_info-->visit_occurrence
    finngenid_info-->measurement
    finngenid_info-->observation

    hilmo --> visit_occurrence
    hilmo --> stem

    prim_out --> visit_occurrence
    prim_out --> stem

    reimb --> visit_occurrence
    reimb --> stem

    canc --> visit_occurrence
    canc --> stem

    death_register --> visit_occurrence
    death_register --> stem

    birth_mother --> visit_occurrence
    birth_mother --> stem

    purch --> visit_occurrence
    purch --> drug_exposure
    
    stem --> conndition_occurrence 
    stem --> procedure_occurrence
    stem --> device_exposure
    stem --> observation
    stem --> measurement
    stem --> death

    fg_codes_info -.-> stem 
    fg_codes_info -.-> visit_occurrence 
    fg_codes_info -->provider
    
```

# Registers

## finngen_info
Also know as `minimum_extended` is a file created by THL to collect participant details. 

- [finngen_info to person](finngenid_info_to_person.html)
- [finngen_info to observation_period](finngenid_info_to_observation_period.html)
- [finngen_info to visit_occurrence](finngenid_info_to_visit_occurrence.html)
- [finngen_info to measurement](finngenid_info_to_measurement.html)
- [finngen_info to observation](finngenid_info_to_observation.html)

## purch
Kela drug purchase registry (PURCH) contain the drug purchase at a pharmacy starting from 1995 [[FinnGen Handbook](https://finngen.gitbook.io/finngen-analyst-handbook/finngen-data-specifics/red-library-data-individual-level-data/what-phenotype-files-are-available-in-sandbox-1/detailed-longitudinal-data/registers-in-the-detailed-longitudinal-data#the-care-notification-system-hilmo)].

- [purch to visit_occurrence](purch_to_visit_occurrence.html)
- [purch to drug_exposure](purch_to_drug_exposure.html)

## hilmo
Hilmo register gather the secondary health care diagnose and operations from the country [[FinnGen Handbook](https://finngen.gitbook.io/finngen-analyst-handbook/finngen-data-specifics/red-library-data-individual-level-data/what-phenotype-files-are-available-in-sandbox-1/detailed-longitudinal-data/registers-in-the-detailed-longitudinal-data#hilmo-care-register-for-health-care)]. 

- [hilmo to visit_occurence](hilmo_to_visit_occurrence.htlm)
- [hilmo to stem](hilmo_to_stem.html)

## prim_out
Avohilmo register gather the primary health care diagnose and operations from the country. 
[[FinnGen Handbook](https://finngen.gitbook.io/finngen-analyst-handbook/finngen-data-specifics/red-library-data-individual-level-data/what-phenotype-files-are-available-in-sandbox-1/detailed-longitudinal-data/registers-in-the-detailed-longitudinal-data#avohilmo-register-of-primary-health-care-visits)]

- [prim_out to visit_occurence](prim_out_to_visit_occurrence.htlm)
- [prim_out to stem](prim_out_to_stem.html)

## reimb
Reimbursement register gathers [[FinnGen Handbook](https://finngen.gitbook.io/finngen-analyst-handbook/finngen-data-specifics/red-library-data-individual-level-data/what-phenotype-files-are-available-in-sandbox-1/detailed-longitudinal-data/registers-in-the-detailed-longitudinal-data#drug-reimbursement-data-the-social-insurance-institution-kela-kansanelaekelaitos)]. 

- [reimb to visit_occurence](reimb_to_visit_occurrence.htlm)
- [reimb to stem](reimb_to_stem.html)

## canc
Cancer register [[FinnGen Handbook](https://finngen.gitbook.io/finngen-analyst-handbook/finngen-data-specifics/red-library-data-individual-level-data/what-phenotype-files-are-available-in-sandbox-1/detailed-longitudinal-data/registers-in-the-detailed-longitudinal-data#finnish-cancer-registry)]. 

- [canc to visit_occurence](canc_to_visit_occurrence.htlm)
- [canc to stem](canc_to_stem.html)

## death_register
Death register [[FinnGen Handbook](https://finngen.gitbook.io/finngen-analyst-handbook/finngen-data-specifics/red-library-data-individual-level-data/what-phenotype-files-are-available-in-sandbox-1/detailed-longitudinal-data/registers-in-the-detailed-longitudinal-data#cause-of-death-data-statistics-finland)]. 

- [death_register to visit_occurence](death_register_to_visit_occurrence.htlm)
- [death_register to stem](death_register_to_stem.html)

## birth_mother
Birth Mother [[FinnGen Handbook](https://finngen.gitbook.io/finngen-analyst-handbook/finngen-data-specifics/red-library-data-individual-level-data/what-phenotype-files-are-available-in-sandbox-1/detailed-longitudinal-data/registers-in-the-detailed-longitudinal-data#cause-of-death-data-statistics-finland)]. 

- [birth_mother to visit_occurence](birth_mother_to_visit_occurrence.html)
- [birth_mother to stem](birth_mother_to_stem.html)

## stem



## Fg_codes_info


[^fn1]: [M.Philofsky 2019](https://ohdsi.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/Melanie-Philofsky-Philofsky-Mapping-Source-Codes-Poster.pdf)

Commit message:

Updated home page with vision registry information

2_etl_specifications/documentation/home.md, after:

---
title: Home
layout: default
nav_order: 1
permalink: /
---

# FinnGen to OMOP CDM v5.4

In addition to genotype data, FinnGen includes the phenotype data from several national registers. 
This site details how the most relevant registers have been converted to the OMOP CDM v5.4. 

In addition to the international vocabularies provided by OMOP, we use national vocabularies build by the FinOMOP group, and few custom vocabularies build by FinnGen [[Appendix:Vocabularies]()]. As a result, most of the events in the clinical data tables have a `source_concept_id` that link to the source non-standard code. This makes the local codes searchable in Atlas and usable in local analysis [^fn1].    

Provided register data has been collected and preprocessed by the Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare (THL). Some of the original columns have been split and some have been merged together. To ease the code mapping, rather than reshape the large provided tables we use a mapping table `fg_codes_info`  [Appendix:Vocabularies]()]. 

Moreover, an intermediate `stem` table is used to collects all the medical events. Events are then placed in the different OMOP domain tables based on the domain of the medical code.   


```mermaid
%%{init: {'theme': 'base' } }%%
flowchart LR
    subgraph FinnGen Registers
        finngenid_info[<a href='finngenid_info.html'>finngenid_info</a>]
        purch[<a href='purch.html'>purch</a>]
        hilmo[<a href='hilmo.html'>hilmo</a>]
        prim_out[<a href='prim_out.html'>prim_out</a>]
        reimb[<a href='reimb.html'>reimb</a>]
        canc[<a href='canc.html'>canc</a>]
        death_register[<a href='death_register.html'>death_register</a>]
        birth_mother[<a href='birth_mother.html'>birth_mother</a>]
        vision[<a href='vision.html'>vision</a>]
    end

    stem[<a href='stem.html'>stem</a>]

    subgraph CDM OMOP v5.4
        person
        observation_period
        visit_occurrence
        drug_exposure
        measurement
        observation
        conndition_occurrence
        procedure_occurrence
        device_exposure
        death
        provider
    end


    finngenid_info-->person
    finngenid_info-->observation_period
    finngenid_info-->visit_occurrence
    finngenid_info-->measurement
    finngenid_info-->observation

    hilmo --> visit_occurrence
    hilmo --> stem

    prim_out --> visit_occurrence
    prim_out --> stem

    reimb --> visit_occurrence
    reimb --> stem

    canc --> visit_occurrence
    canc --> stem

    death_register --> visit_occurrence
    death_register --> stem

    birth_mother --> visit_occurrence
    birth_mother --> stem

    vision --> visit_occurrence
    vision --> stem
    vision --> measurement

    purch --> visit_occurrence
    purch --> drug_exposure
    
    stem --> conndition_occurrence 
    stem --> procedure_occurrence
    stem --> device_exposure
    stem --> observation
    stem --> measurement
    stem --> death

    fg_codes_info -.-> stem 
    fg_codes_info -.-> visit_occurrence 
    fg_codes_info -->provider
    
```

# Registers

## finngen_info
Also know as `minimum_extended` is a file created by THL to collect participant details. 

- [finngen_info to person](finngenid_info_to_person.html)
- [finngen_info to observation_period](finngenid_info_to_observation_period.html)
- [finngen_info to visit_occurrence](finngenid_info_to_visit_occurrence.html)
- [finngen_info to measurement](finngenid_info_to_measurement.html)
- [finngen_info to observation](finngenid_info_to_observation.html)

## purch
Kela drug purchase registry (PURCH) contain the drug purchase at a pharmacy starting from 1995 [[FinnGen Handbook](https://finngen.gitbook.io/finngen-analyst-handbook/finngen-data-specifics/red-library-data-individual-level-data/what-phenotype-files-are-available-in-sandbox-1/detailed-longitudinal-data/registers-in-the-detailed-longitudinal-data#the-care-notification-system-hilmo)].

- [purch to visit_occurrence](purch_to_visit_occurrence.html)
- [purch to drug_exposure](purch_to_drug_exposure.html)

## hilmo
Hilmo register gather the secondary health care diagnose and operations from the country [[FinnGen Handbook](https://finngen.gitbook.io/finngen-analyst-handbook/finngen-data-specifics/red-library-data-individual-level-data/what-phenotype-files-are-available-in-sandbox-1/detailed-longitudinal-data/registers-in-the-detailed-longitudinal-data#hilmo-care-register-for-health-care)]. 

- [hilmo to visit_occurence](hilmo_to_visit_occurrence.html)
- [hilmo to stem](hilmo_to_stem.html)

## prim_out
Avohilmo register gather the primary health care diagnose and operations from the country. 
[[FinnGen Handbook](https://finngen.gitbook.io/finngen-analyst-handbook/finngen-data-specifics/red-library-data-individual-level-data/what-phenotype-files-are-available-in-sandbox-1/detailed-longitudinal-data/registers-in-the-detailed-longitudinal-data#avohilmo-register-of-primary-health-care-visits)]

- [prim_out to visit_occurence](prim_out_to_visit_occurrence.htlm)
- [prim_out to stem](prim_out_to_stem.html)

## reimb
Reimbursement register gathers [[FinnGen Handbook](https://finngen.gitbook.io/finngen-analyst-handbook/finngen-data-specifics/red-library-data-individual-level-data/what-phenotype-files-are-available-in-sandbox-1/detailed-longitudinal-data/registers-in-the-detailed-longitudinal-data#drug-reimbursement-data-the-social-insurance-institution-kela-kansanelaekelaitos)]. 

- [reimb to visit_occurence](reimb_to_visit_occurrence.htlm)
- [reimb to stem](reimb_to_stem.html)

## canc
Cancer register [[FinnGen Handbook](https://finngen.gitbook.io/finngen-analyst-handbook/finngen-data-specifics/red-library-data-individual-level-data/what-phenotype-files-are-available-in-sandbox-1/detailed-longitudinal-data/registers-in-the-detailed-longitudinal-data#finnish-cancer-registry)]. 

- [canc to visit_occurence](canc_to_visit_occurrence.htlm)
- [canc to stem](canc_to_stem.html)

## death_register
Death register [[FinnGen Handbook](https://finngen.gitbook.io/finngen-analyst-handbook/finngen-data-specifics/red-library-data-individual-level-data/what-phenotype-files-are-available-in-sandbox-1/detailed-longitudinal-data/registers-in-the-detailed-longitudinal-data#cause-of-death-data-statistics-finland)]. 

- [death_register to visit_occurence](death_register_to_visit_occurrence.htlm)
- [death_register to stem](death_register_to_stem.html)

## birth_mother
Birth Mother [[FinnGen Handbook](https://finngen.gitbook.io/finngen-analyst-handbook/finngen-data-specifics/red-library-data-individual-level-data/what-phenotype-files-are-available-in-sandbox-1/detailed-longitudinal-data/registers-in-the-detailed-longitudinal-data#cause-of-death-data-statistics-finland)]. 

- [birth_mother to visit_occurence](birth_mother_to_visit_occurrence.html)
- [birth_mother to stem](birth_mother_to_stem.html)

## vision
Vision [[FinnGen Handbook](https://finngen.gitbook.io/finngen-handbook/finngen-data-specifics/red-library-data-individual-level-data/what-phenotype-files-are-available-in-sandbox-1/other-registers/the-finnish-register-of-visual-impairment)]. 

- [vision to visit_occurence](vision_to_visit_occurrence.html)
- [vision to stem](vision_to_stem.html)
- [vision to measurement](vision_to_measurement.html)


## stem

- [stem to condition_occurrence](stem_to_condition_occurrence.html)
- [stem to procedure_occurrence](stem_to_procedure_occurrence.html)
- [stem to device_exposure](stem_to_device_exposure.html)
- [stem to measurement](stem_to_measurement.html)
- [stem to observation](stem_to_observation.html)
- [stem to death](stem_to_death.html)


## Fg_codes_info


[^fn1]: [M.Philofsky 2019](https://ohdsi.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/Melanie-Philofsky-Philofsky-Mapping-Source-Codes-Poster.pdf)
